src/content/blog/applying-for-uk-citizenship.mdx, before:

---
title: Applying for UK citizenship
description:
 I applied for UK citizenship towards the end of 2021. In this article, I
 describe my experience in full detail.
date: '2022-01-31'
categories:
 - uk
banner: /blog/applying-for-uk-citizenship/assets/flag.png
---

Back in 2010, I first arrived in the UK, to do my degree. Eleven years passed by
so quickly, and I recently applied for and became a UK citizen. It was a bit of
nervewracking experience, mostly because there aren't many people you can talk
to about it. In this article, I describe my experience of applying for UK
citizenship. This is just my personal experience, and you shouldn't expect your
experience to be the same.

<!--more-->

## Table of contents

## Timeline

<Timeline
 items={[
  {
   marker: 'Day -30',
   title: 'Start preparing application',
   description: 'Filling in the form, scanning required documents etc.',
   iconName: 'start',
   color: 'info'
  },
  {
   marker: 'Day -10',
   title: 'One year since receiving ILR',
   description:
    'I could have applied on this day, but I was not fully prepared.',
   iconName: 'alarm',
   color: 'error'
  },
  {
   marker: 'Day 0',
   title: 'Submit application online',
   description:
    'I was able to book my biometrics appointment immediately. The earliest free appointment was about a month away. I could also start uploading my documents on UKVCAS. The deadline for uploading them was 2 days before the biometrics appointment, so I had plenty of time.',
   iconName: 'laptop_mac',
   color: 'secondary'
  },
  {
   marker: 'Day 2',
   title: 'Document checking service',
   description:
    'I had paid £46 for the optional UKVCAS document checking service. I got an email form them saying they had checked my documents and that everything seemed okay.',
   iconName: 'scanner',
   color: 'secondary'
  },
  {
   marker: 'Day 30',
   title: 'Biometrics appointment',
   description: 'I took my current and previous passports.',
   iconName: 'fingerprint'
  },
  {
   marker: 'Day 60',
   title: 'Invitation to citizenship ceremony',
   description: 'Deadline to respond to the invitation was 20 days.',
   iconName: 'mail',
   color: 'warning'
  },
  {
   marker: 'Day 70',
   title: 'Citizenship ceremony',
   description:
    "Deadline to return my ILR BRP was 5 days. I couldn't travel abroad until I got a new UK passport.",
   iconName: 'pan_tool',
   color: 'success'
  },
  {
   marker: 'Day 71',
   title: 'Apply for UK passport',
   iconName: 'laptop_mac',
   color: 'secondary'
  },
  {
   marker: 'Day 80',
   title: 'Received new passport.',
   description: 'Free to travel as a British citizen.',
   iconName: 'menu_book',
   color: 'success'
  }
 ]}
/>

## Overall experience

For all of my previous VISA applications, I had a company lawyer supporting me.
However, for my citizenship, I had to apply on my own. It was quite stressful
not to have a qualified person to check my application or to clarify my
questions. I consulted a friend of mine who had applied recently. I also found a
[few videos on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=UK+citizenship+application).

### Filling in the online application form

The form itself took a few days of effort to fill. Travel history was easy
because I already had prepared it for my ILR application the year before. The
hardest bit to fill were details about previous UK immigration applications. I
had to search through emails from years ago. I didn't find application reference
numbers for all of them or dates for all of them, but that was okay because
those fields were optional. Overall, it didn't feel as difficult as the ILR
application.

### Book biometrics appointment

The only free biometrics appointments I could find were nearly a month away.
According to [UKVCAS FAQ](https://www.ukvcas.co.uk/faq),
`appointments are released daily, 28 days in advance`.

### Supporting documents

Specifically for my case, I had to provide the following documents.

<Table
 columns={[
  { name: 'Requirement', key: 'req' },
  { name: 'What I submitted', key: 'submission' }
 ]}
 rows={[
  {
   req: 'Passport',
   submission: 'Scan of my current passport (front and back)'
  },
  {
   req: 'Proof of living in the UK for 5 years',
   submission:
    `Scans of all pages for my current and previous passport
    Scans of P60s and reference letters from my employers (just to be safe)`
  },
  {
   req: 'Proof of freedom from immigration time restrictions',
   submission: 'Scan of ILR'
  },
  {
   req: 'Degree certificate to prove level of English',
   submission: 'Scan of my University certificate'
  },
  {
   req: 'Two Referee declarations',
   submission: 'Scan of referee letters from two of my friends'
  },
  {
   req: 'Current Biometric Residence Permit',
   submission: 'Scan of ILR'
  }
 ]}
/>

### Biometrics appointment

### Citizenship ceremony

### Applying for British passport

## Conclusion

There are other goals I wish I could set for myself, e.g., learn to play the
piano. Unfortunately, there simply isn't enough time. :sob: This is probably
more than enough goals for this year to keep me busy. It'd be awesome if I could
achieve some of it. :crossed_fingers: Have you decided what your New Year
resolutions are?

Commit message:

Updated for invitation to citizenship ceremony

src/content/blog/applying-for-uk-citizenship.mdx, after:

---
title: Applying for UK citizenship
description:
 I applied for UK citizenship towards the end of 2021. In this article, I
 describe my experience in full detail.
date: '2022-01-31'
categories:
 - uk
banner: /blog/applying-for-uk-citizenship/assets/flag.png
---

Back in 2010, I first arrived in the UK, to do my degree. Eleven years passed by
so quickly, and I recently applied for and became a UK citizen. It was a bit of
nervewracking experience, mostly because there aren't many people you can talk
to about it. In this article, I describe my experience of applying for UK
citizenship. This is just my personal experience, and you shouldn't expect your
experience to be the same.

<!--more-->

## Table of contents

## Timeline

<Timeline
 items={[
  {
   marker: 'Day -30',
   title: 'Start preparing application',
   description: 'Filling in the form, scanning required documents etc.',
   iconName: 'start',
   color: 'info'
  },
  {
   marker: 'Day -10',
   title: 'One year since receiving ILR',
   description:
    'I could have applied on this day, but I was not fully prepared.',
   iconName: 'alarm',
   color: 'error'
  },
  {
   marker: 'Day 0',
   title: 'Submit application online',
   description:
    'I was able to book my biometrics appointment immediately. The earliest free appointment was about a month away. I could also start uploading my documents on UKVCAS. The deadline for uploading them was 2 days before the biometrics appointment, so I had plenty of time.',
   iconName: 'laptop_mac',
   color: 'secondary'
  },
  {
   marker: 'Day 2',
   title: 'Document checking service',
   description:
    'I had paid £46 for the optional UKVCAS document checking service. I got an email form them saying they had checked my documents and that everything seemed okay.',
   iconName: 'scanner',
   color: 'secondary'
  },
  {
   marker: 'Day 30',
   title: 'Biometrics appointment',
   description:
    'I took my current passport with me. The appointment only took about 15 minutes including wait time.',
   iconName: 'fingerprint'
  },
  {
   marker: 'Day 60',
   title: 'Citizenship ceremony invitation',
   description:
    'I received an invitation via email. I was given 6 months to attend the ceremony, although under non Covid circumstances it would have been three months. Since I was not in the UK when I got my invitation, I had to book it for when I would be back in the UK.',
   iconName: 'mail',
   color: 'warning'
  },
  {
   marker: 'Day 80',
   title: 'Citizenship ceremony',
   description:
    "Deadline to return my ILR BRP was 5 days. I couldn't travel abroad until I got a new UK passport.",
   iconName: 'pan_tool',
   color: 'success'
  },
  {
   marker: 'Day 80',
   title: 'Apply for UK passport',
   iconName: 'laptop_mac',
   color: 'secondary'
  },
  {
   marker: 'Day 100',
   title: 'Received new passport.',
   description: 'Free to travel as a British citizen.',
   iconName: 'menu_book',
   color: 'success'
  }
 ]}
/>

## Overall experience

For all of my previous VISA applications, I had a company lawyer supporting me.
However, for my citizenship, I had to apply on my own. It was quite stressful
not to have a qualified person to check my application or to clarify my
questions. I consulted a friend of mine who had applied recently. I also found a
[few videos on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=UK+citizenship+application).

### Filling in the online application form

The form itself took a few days of effort to fill. Travel history was easy
because I already had prepared it for my ILR application the year before. The
hardest bit to fill were details about previous UK immigration applications. I
had to search through emails from years ago. I didn't find application reference
numbers for all of them or dates for all of them, but that was okay because
those fields were optional. Overall, it didn't feel as difficult as the ILR
application.

### Book biometrics appointment

The only free biometrics appointments I could find were nearly a month away.
According to [UKVCAS FAQ](https://www.ukvcas.co.uk/faq),
`appointments are released daily, 28 days in advance`.

### Supporting documents

Specifically for my case, I had to provide the following documents.

<Table
 columns={[
  { name: 'Requirement', key: 'req' },
  { name: 'What I submitted', key: 'submission' }
 ]}
 rows={[
  {
   req: 'Passport',
   submission: 'Scan of my current passport (front and back)'
  },
  {
   req: 'Proof of living in the UK for 5 years',
   submission: `Scans of all pages for my current and previous passport
    Scans of P60s and reference letters from my employers (just to be safe)`
  },
  {
   req: 'Proof of freedom from immigration time restrictions',
   submission: 'Scan of ILR'
  },
  {
   req: 'Degree certificate to prove level of English',
   submission: 'Scan of my University certificate'
  },
  {
   req: 'Two Referee declarations',
   submission: 'Scan of referee letters from two of my friends'
  },
  {
   req: 'Current Biometric Residence Permit',
   submission: 'Scan of ILR'
  }
 ]}
/>

### Biometrics appointment

### Citizenship ceremony

### Applying for British passport

## Conclusion
