src/content/blog/why-and-how-to-use-rss-for-consuming-knowledge.mdx, before:

---
title: Why and how to use RSS for consuming knowledge
description:
 An introduction to RSS and how to make use of it to keep up to date with your
 favourite websites and blogs
date: '2021-08-31'
categories:
 - learning
banner: /blog/why-and-how-to-use-rss-for-consuming-knowledge/assets/banner.svg
bannerRef: https://pixabay.com/vectors/rss-news-feed-blog-web-icon-40674/
---

# Why and how to use RSS for consuming knowledge

Consuming knowledge is the first step towards getting good at anything. Today,
the primary way I consume knowledge is via the Internet. As a software
developer, keeping up to date with developments in my industry is something I
used to find particularly challenging. I used to rely on social media, but I
became tired of the noise and advertisements. Today, I use a technology called
RSS which allows me to subscribe to new content from blogs and other websites. I
love it! In this article, I introduce you to RSS and how to make the best use of
it. Hopefully, this article will help you decide whether it's worth a shot.

<!--more-->

## Introduction

Learning or consuming knowledge is one of our primary functions. It is a
lifelong process that is a joy in itself and helps us thrive and find happiness
in this rapidly changing world. We read, we watch, and we listen. We consume
knowledge from a myriad of sources. Traditionally, these included books, radio,
TV, conversations, lectures, presentations, conferences, educational courses
etc. However, thanks to the Internet, we also have blogs, podcasts, tweets,
online courses, online communities etc., thrown into the mix.

<Youtube
 id="yUcd_gXByoQ"
 caption="I was inspired by this talk by Kent Dodds where he describes the Consume -> Build -> Teach  for maximizing your productivity and learning rate."
/>

## The problem: How to follow websites and blogs that I find interesting

I wanted to keep up to date with developments in my field, particularly by
following blogs and websites that I like. Visiting them manually is a pain. I
tried subscribing to some of them via email. However, I found that very
inefficient for the following reasons:

1. Not all websites have email newsletters.
1. I prefer using my email for essential and one-off things, especially since I
   follow the [Inbox Zero](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9ql1CQfxWxQ)
   philosophy.
1. I like to do all my content consumption in one go, typically just one or two
   times a week. I don't want to be notified of every single update
   instantaneously.

Over the years, I also learned not to rely on social media for knowledge
consumption. Sure, I can stay on top of things with Twitter or Facebook, but I
get so little control over what I see. With social media, all I see is the stuff
other people share because they find it interesting, aka echo chambers/filter
bubbles. There's a lot of noise there, not to mention advertisements. I'm sick
of it. For the most part, I've dialled down on social media by deleting their
apps from my phone this year.

## Enter [RSS](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/RSS)

[RSS](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/RSS) stands for Really Simple Syndication. It
allows users and applications to access updates to websites in a standardized,
computer-readable format. The idea is that websites provide an RSS feed, a
simple text file, that contains the title, description, and link for each post.
An RSS reader application then allows you to subscribe to RSS feeds belonging to
different websites and thus keep track of multiple websites in a single place.
Isn't that neat?

With an RSS feed, I can see everything a website publishes. I can then decide
for myself what is interesting and what isn't. I'm entirely in control over what
takes up my time/attention.

RSS originated in the 90s and enjoyed peak popularity in 2006 or so before
fading into relative obscurity. In 2013, Google discontinued
[Google Reader](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Google_Reader), a popular RSS reader
at that time, citing declining usage. Arguably, they wanted to kill RSS because
it wasn't compatible with an advertising business model that depends on
pageviews. Fun fact: [Podcasts](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Podcast) are still
distributed using RSS.

Curious about what an RSS feed looks like? It uses the
[XML](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/XML) format. However, there are also newer
formats such as [Atom](<https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Atom_(Web_standard)>), and
[JSON feed](https://www.jsonfeed.org/). My website's feeds are listed below. For
the coders amongst you, these are generated using
[this script](https://github.com/bluprince13/bluprince13-next/blob/main/src/modules/generateRss.js).

- [feed.xml](https://bluprince13.com/feed.xml)
- [atom.xml](https://bluprince13.com/atom.xml)
- [feed.json](https://bluprince13.com/feed.json)

Not all websites have RSS feeds setup. However, fortunately you can convert
email newsletters to an RSS feed using something like
[Kill the newsletter](https://kill-the-newsletter.com/).

## My RSS setup

### Subscription manager - [Inoreader](https://www.inoreader.com/) - Free

[Inoreader](https://www.inoreader.com/) is a free RSS subscription manager that
works well enough. The handy browser extension lets you quickly detect and
subscribe to the feeds of the websites you visit. There are
[Inoreader apps](https://www.inoreader.com/apps) you could use to read your
feeds as well. Another popular alternative is [Feedly](https://feedly.com/).

<Figure
 src="/blog/why-and-how-to-use-rss-for-consuming-knowledge/assets/inoreader-browser-extension.png"
 caption="Inoreader browser extension"
 size="l"
/>

### Mac - [Reeder](https://reederapp.com/) - $9.99

[Reeder](https://reederapp.com/) is the most popular RSS reader app for Macs. I
tend not to use it too much because I usually read my feeds on my tablet or
phone. Reeder is recommended by
[The Sweet Setup](https://thesweetsetup.com/apps/best-rss-reader-os-x/).

<Figure
 src="/blog/why-and-how-to-use-rss-for-consuming-knowledge/assets/reeder.png"
 caption="Reeder"
 size="l"
/>

### iPhone/iPad - [Unread](https://www.goldenhillsoftware.com/unread/) - $19.99/year

I am not fond of the subscription model for
[Unread](https://www.goldenhillsoftware.com/unread/) to be honest. However, I
can't help but love the UI. The widget is an excellent way of keeping track of
unread articles. The unread articles count motivates me to get my reading done
regularly. Typically, I do all of my reading during weekends. It's also easy to
unsubscribe from a feed from within the app. I'm pretty quick to unsubscribe
from feeds that feel spammy - without this, my unread count would get out of
control. Unread is also recommended by
[The Sweet Setup](https://thesweetsetup.com/apps/best-rss-app-ipad/).

<Figure
 src="/blog/why-and-how-to-use-rss-for-consuming-knowledge/assets/unread.jpeg"
 caption="From left: Unread widget (at the bottom), list view, unsubscribe button, article view"
 size="l"
/>

## Recommendations for RSS feeds

Feel like giving RSS a try? Here are some recommendations for feeds to subscribe
to. I currently have 37 subscriptions, but what I've listed below are just some
of my favourites.

If you have any recommendations for RSS feeds to follow, please let me know in
the comments below.

### Software development

- [Zero to mastery blog](https://zerotomastery.io/blog/)

  Monthly newsletters on `Web development`, `Python` and `Machine learning`. See
  [Web Developer Monthly 💻🚀 July 2021 edition](https://zerotomastery.io/blog/web-developer-monthly-july-2021)
  for example.

- [React status](https://javascriptweekly.com/) or other weekly newsletters by
  [Cooperpress](https://cooperpress.com/publications/)

- [Kent Dodds blog](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/)

  This guy is a God in the front-end development industry and one of my heroes.

- [AWS This Week](https://acloud.guru/series/aws-this-week)

  Keep up to date with developments in AWS.

### Finance

- [Financial Samurai](https://www.financialsamurai.com/)

  Advice about investing, real estate, retirement planning etc., aimed at early
  retirement. See
  [Ranking The Best Passive Income Investments](https://www.financialsamurai.com/ranking-the-best-passive-income-investments/)
  for example.

### Other

- [The Sweet Setup ](https://thesweetsetup.com/blog/)

  This is where I get most of my Mac / iPhone / iPad app recommendations.

## Conclusion

In general, websites that curate interesting news, e.g.,
[zerotomastery blog](https://zerotomastery.io/blog/), are better value for time
than individually subscribing to multiple different websites. Subscribe to
websites as and when you feel like it, but remember to unsubscribe immediately
if you find any of them spammy or not as interesting as you thought it would be.
Your time is precious. I tend to avoid websites with daily updates for this
reason. It's just noise.

Don't put all your eggs in one basket. Subscribe to multiple websites and people
with different points of view so that you're better informed. However, you don't
need to read everything you get in full detail. You should expect only to read
the headings and summaries or have a skim through for 80% of the feeds. The aim
is to have a general awareness of what's happening, not be an expert in all of
it.

RSS isn't overly popular yet because people generally find it easier to use
social media. However, as more and more people suffer social media burnout, I
think they will turn to RSS or something similar that puts them back in the
driver's seat.

Commit message:

Clarify that Feedly and Inoreader have cross platform apps.

src/content/blog/why-and-how-to-use-rss-for-consuming-knowledge.mdx, after:

---
title: Why and how to use RSS for consuming knowledge
description:
 An introduction to RSS and how to make use of it to keep up to date with your
 favourite websites and blogs
date: '2021-08-31'
categories:
 - learning
banner: /blog/why-and-how-to-use-rss-for-consuming-knowledge/assets/banner.svg
bannerRef: https://pixabay.com/vectors/rss-news-feed-blog-web-icon-40674/
---

# Why and how to use RSS for consuming knowledge

Consuming knowledge is the first step towards getting good at anything. Today,
the primary way I consume knowledge is via the Internet. As a software
developer, keeping up to date with developments in my industry is something I
used to find particularly challenging. I used to rely on social media, but I
became tired of the noise and advertisements. Today, I use a technology called
RSS which allows me to subscribe to new content from blogs and other websites. I
love it! In this article, I introduce you to RSS and how to make the best use of
it. Hopefully, this article will help you decide whether it's worth a shot.

<!--more-->

## Introduction

Learning or consuming knowledge is one of our primary functions. It is a
lifelong process that is a joy in itself and helps us thrive and find happiness
in this rapidly changing world. We read, we watch, and we listen. We consume
knowledge from a myriad of sources. Traditionally, these included books, radio,
TV, conversations, lectures, presentations, conferences, educational courses
etc. However, thanks to the Internet, we also have blogs, podcasts, tweets,
online courses, online communities etc., thrown into the mix.

<Youtube
 id="yUcd_gXByoQ"
 caption="I was inspired by this talk by Kent Dodds where he describes the Consume -> Build -> Teach  for maximizing your productivity and learning rate."
/>

## The problem: How to follow websites and blogs that I find interesting

I wanted to keep up to date with developments in my field, particularly by
following blogs and websites that I like. Visiting them manually is a pain. I
tried subscribing to some of them via email. However, I found that very
inefficient for the following reasons:

1. Not all websites have email newsletters.
1. I prefer using my email for essential and one-off things, especially since I
   follow the [Inbox Zero](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9ql1CQfxWxQ)
   philosophy.
1. I like to do all my content consumption in one go, typically just one or two
   times a week. I don't want to be notified of every single update
   instantaneously.

Over the years, I also learned not to rely on social media for knowledge
consumption. Sure, I can stay on top of things with Twitter or Facebook, but I
get so little control over what I see. With social media, all I see is the stuff
other people share because they find it interesting, aka echo chambers/filter
bubbles. There's a lot of noise there, not to mention advertisements. I'm sick
of it. For the most part, I've dialled down on social media by deleting their
apps from my phone this year.

## Enter [RSS](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/RSS)

[RSS](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/RSS) stands for Really Simple Syndication. It
allows users and applications to access updates to websites in a standardized,
computer-readable format. The idea is that websites provide an RSS feed, a
simple text file, that contains the title, description, and link for each post.
An RSS reader application then allows you to subscribe to RSS feeds belonging to
different websites and thus keep track of multiple websites in a single place.
Isn't that neat?

With an RSS feed, I can see everything a website publishes. I can then decide
for myself what is interesting and what isn't. I'm entirely in control over what
takes up my time/attention.

RSS originated in the 90s and enjoyed peak popularity in 2006 or so before
fading into relative obscurity. In 2013, Google discontinued
[Google Reader](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Google_Reader), a popular RSS reader
at that time, citing declining usage. Arguably, they wanted to kill RSS because
it wasn't compatible with an advertising business model that depends on
pageviews. Fun fact: [Podcasts](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Podcast) are still
distributed using RSS.

Curious about what an RSS feed looks like? It uses the
[XML](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/XML) format. However, there are also newer
formats such as [Atom](<https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Atom_(Web_standard)>), and
[JSON feed](https://www.jsonfeed.org/). My website's feeds are listed below. For
the coders amongst you, these are generated using
[this script](https://github.com/bluprince13/bluprince13-next/blob/main/src/modules/generateRss.js).

- [feed.xml](https://bluprince13.com/feed.xml)
- [atom.xml](https://bluprince13.com/atom.xml)
- [feed.json](https://bluprince13.com/feed.json)

Not all websites have RSS feeds setup. However, fortunately you can convert
email newsletters to an RSS feed using something like
[Kill the newsletter](https://kill-the-newsletter.com/).

## My RSS setup

### Subscription manager - [Inoreader](https://www.inoreader.com/) - Free

[Inoreader](https://www.inoreader.com/) is a free RSS subscription manager that
works well enough. The handy browser extension lets you quickly detect and
subscribe to the feeds of the websites you visit. Another popular alternative is
[Feedly](https://feedly.com/). Both [Feedly](https://feedly.com/apps.html) and
[Inoreader](https://www.inoreader.com/apps) have their own cross-platform apps.
However, you can also use them with third party apps.

<Figure
 src="/blog/why-and-how-to-use-rss-for-consuming-knowledge/assets/inoreader-browser-extension.png"
 caption="Inoreader browser extension"
 size="l"
/>

### Mac - [Reeder](https://reederapp.com/) - $9.99

[Reeder](https://reederapp.com/) is the most popular RSS reader app for Macs. I
tend not to use it too much because I usually read my feeds on my tablet or
phone. Reeder is recommended by
[The Sweet Setup](https://thesweetsetup.com/apps/best-rss-reader-os-x/).

<Figure
 src="/blog/why-and-how-to-use-rss-for-consuming-knowledge/assets/reeder.png"
 caption="Reeder"
 size="l"
/>

### iPhone/iPad - [Unread](https://www.goldenhillsoftware.com/unread/) - $19.99/year

I am not fond of the subscription model for
[Unread](https://www.goldenhillsoftware.com/unread/) to be honest. However, I
can't help but love the UI. The widget is an excellent way of keeping track of
unread articles. The unread articles count motivates me to get my reading done
regularly. Typically, I do all of my reading during weekends. It's also easy to
unsubscribe from a feed from within the app. I'm pretty quick to unsubscribe
from feeds that feel spammy - without this, my unread count would get out of
control. Unread is also recommended by
[The Sweet Setup](https://thesweetsetup.com/apps/best-rss-app-ipad/).

<Figure
 src="/blog/why-and-how-to-use-rss-for-consuming-knowledge/assets/unread.jpeg"
 caption="From left: Unread widget (at the bottom), list view, unsubscribe button, article view"
 size="l"
/>

## Recommendations for RSS feeds

Feel like giving RSS a try? Here are some recommendations for feeds to subscribe
to. I currently have 37 subscriptions, but what I've listed below are just some
of my favourites.

If you have any recommendations for RSS feeds to follow, please let me know in
the comments below.

### Software development

- [Zero to mastery blog](https://zerotomastery.io/blog/)

  Monthly newsletters on `Web development`, `Python` and `Machine learning`. See
  [Web Developer Monthly 💻🚀 July 2021 edition](https://zerotomastery.io/blog/web-developer-monthly-july-2021)
  for example.

- [React status](https://javascriptweekly.com/) or other weekly newsletters by
  [Cooperpress](https://cooperpress.com/publications/)

- [Kent Dodds blog](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/)

  This guy is a God in the front-end development industry and one of my heroes.

- [AWS This Week](https://acloud.guru/series/aws-this-week)

  Keep up to date with developments in AWS.

### Finance

- [Financial Samurai](https://www.financialsamurai.com/)

  Advice about investing, real estate, retirement planning etc., aimed at early
  retirement. See
  [Ranking The Best Passive Income Investments](https://www.financialsamurai.com/ranking-the-best-passive-income-investments/)
  for example.

### Other

- [The Sweet Setup ](https://thesweetsetup.com/blog/)

  This is where I get most of my Mac / iPhone / iPad app recommendations.

## Conclusion

In general, websites that curate interesting news, e.g.,
[zerotomastery blog](https://zerotomastery.io/blog/), are better value for time
than individually subscribing to multiple different websites. Subscribe to
websites as and when you feel like it, but remember to unsubscribe immediately
if you find any of them spammy or not as interesting as you thought it would be.
Your time is precious. I tend to avoid websites with daily updates for this
reason. It's just noise.

Don't put all your eggs in one basket. Subscribe to multiple websites and people
with different points of view so that you're better informed. However, you don't
need to read everything you get in full detail. You should expect only to read
the headings and summaries or have a skim through for 80% of the feeds. The aim
is to have a general awareness of what's happening, not be an expert in all of
it.

RSS isn't overly popular yet because people generally find it easier to use
social media. However, as more and more people suffer social media burnout, I
think they will turn to RSS or something similar that puts them back in the
driver's seat.
